.PU
.TH ENCHANT 1 "July 2006" enchant "Enchant Mini Help File"
.SH NAME
Enchant \- a spellchecker
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ll +8
.B enchant
[\fB\-a\fR] [\fB\-l\fR] [\fB\-L\fR] [\fB\-v\fR]
.ll -8
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Enchant
is an ispell-compatible spellchecker.
.SS OPTIONS
.TP
.B "\-a"
List alternatives.
.TP
.B "\-l"
List only the misspellings.
.TP
.B "\-L"
Include the line number in the output.
.TP
.B "\-v"
Prints the program's version.
.SH ENCHANT ORDERING FILE
Enchant has a global and a per-user ordering file named \fIenchant.ordering\fR.
It lets the user specify which spelling backend to use for individual
languages in the case when you care which backend gets used. The global
file is located in \fI$(datadir)/enchant\fR and the per-user file is
located in \fI~/.enchant\fR.
The per-user file takes precedence, if found.
.PP
The ordering file takes the form language_tag:<comma-separated list of spelling
backends>. I am currently aware of the following backends: aspell, myspell, ispell, uspell, hspell, voikko, and zemberek. '*' is
used to mean "use this ordering for all languages, unless instructed otherwise." For example:
.PP
*:aspell,myspell,ispell
.br
en:aspell,myspell,ispell
.br
en_UK:myspell,aspell,ispell
.br
fr:myspell,ispell:aspell
.SH DIRECTORIES IMPORTANT TO ENCHANT
Unless configured otherwise, Enchant's Myspell, Ispell, and Uspell
backends will look for dictionaries in directories specific to Enchant,
and will not use your system-wide installed dictionaries. This is for
pragmatic reasons since many distributions install these dictionaries
into different locations.
.PP
Like the \fIenchant.ordering\fR file described above, Enchant looks in
the global directory for these dictionaries and a per-user directory.
The per-user directory takes precedence if it is found.
Enchant looks for Myspell dictionaries in \fI$(datadir)/enchant/myspell\fR and \fI~/.enchant/myspell\fR.
Enchant looks for Ispell dictionaries in \fI$(datadir)/enchant/ispell\fR and \fI~/.enchant/ispell\fR.
Enchant looks for Uspell dictionaries in \fI$(datadir)/enchant/uspell\fR and \fI~/.enchant/uspell\fR.
.PP
Packagers and users may wish to make symbolic links to the system-wide dictionary directories. Or, preferably, use the --with-myspell-dir, --with-ispell-dir, and --with-uspell-dir 'configure' arguments.
.SH MORE INFORMATION
http://www.abisource.com/enchant/
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR aspell(1),
.BR ispell(1),
.SH "AUTHOR"
 Dom Lachowicz
 WEB: http://www.abisource.com/enchant/
 MAIL: domlachowicz@gmail.com
